#Canon of Demographic Changes and Pensions
##Introduction
Just a few centuries ago, people all over the world had not many options regarding their old-age security. Savings were costly for most of the people because of limited access to capital markets (i.e. it was difficult for peasants to invest or to open a bank account) and there was no public system providing old-age benefits except for church charities. Therefore, a common way to secure own retirement was a large family where the young generation took care of the old, expecting the same from their own children in the future. Such a system could have some advantages (e.g. when each young generation was larger than the older one) but its risks and limits were obvious: for childless people, as well as for the young generation bound to its parents.

For these and other reasons, the public pension plans were established in many western countries at the beginning of the 20th century. The first public pension system is considered the old-age social insurance program introduced in 1989 in Germany by the chancellor Otto von Bismarck [(1)](https://www.ssa.gov/history/ottob.html). During the 20th century, the size of pension systems rose in many countries and the 2014 Net Replacement Rate (i.e. the individual pension entitlement divided by pre-retirement earnings) in OECD countries was 63% [(2)](https://data.oecd.org/pension/net-pension-replacement-rates.htm). Obviously, running such a large system leaded (and will lead) to many socio-economic consequences. For instance, as regards the traditional family pension security Galasso, Gatti, & Profeta (2009) argue that a more generous public pension system leads to lower fertility rates, as the economic importance of family is reduced. This effect is particularly strong in countries with less developed capital markets where the possibility to save and invest is limited [(3)](http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10797-009-9104-5). 

One of the often discussed spectres of our time is called “population ageing”. Population scientists are showing relentless statistics of a long-term decline in fertility below the replacement fertility rate in developed countries, populists are foretelling the end of the Western civilization and even politicians are timidly hinting inevitable changes in social policies. Like in most of the big social issues, also in this debate economists have some important points to say. Yet they are not heard adequately, perhaps due to the overly scientific and mathematical arguments they provide.

The goal of this canon is to rectify this oversight and to provide some general economic knowledge related to the ageing population issue in an understandable way. We have focused on one specific subtopic – the impact of current demographic changes on pensions. Specifically, all the troubles and inconveniences the aging population causes to current pension systems. Firstly, we provide a brief introduction to pension schemes as well as some facts about the demographic changes. Then we link these two areas and show the main implications, some possible solutions already applied or just discussed among economists and its close relation to government policies. In the end, we also relate all the above mentioned to the past, current and future situation in the Netherlands.

##Pension Systems
###Pay-as-you-go Pension (PAYG) Scheme
In the PAYG system, pensions are financed by current revenue of the government. A government does not need to accumulate savings for future generation’s pensions; it can tax the working population to cover the pensions of retirees. In this system, the pensions received by any generation do not necessarily equal to this generation’s contribution for pensions. This feature of the PAYG scheme mainly provides two tools to the government. The government can redistribute resources across generations and share risks across generations.

###Funded Pension Scheme
In a fully funded pension system, pensions of retirees are financed by their own savings. Contributions (savings) of participants are invested in financial assets; when they are retired their pensions will be funded by all of their contributions in addition to returns (interest and dividends) to their contributions. This pension scheme has two important characteristics. Firstly, assets in this pension system should be equal to financial liabilities for pension funds. In other words, in principle, the total value of contributions from participants of pension funds should be the same amount with the total value of pension benefits. Secondly, if there is no intergenerational redistribution, a generation’s pension rights are limited to their savings and the returns on their savings.

###Defined-Contribution Plans, Defined-Benefit Plans and Notional Defined-Contribution Pensions
The link between contributions of workers and their benefits when they are retired is important for both pension schemes. This link can be analyzed under two extreme plans. In the one extreme case, called defined-contribution plan, pensions (benefits) are determined by past contributions and the returns to those contributions. In this system, while contributions are defined and fixed, benefits of retirees are uncertain. On the other hand, in the defined-benefit plan, the height of the benefits for retirees is a set promised amount independent of future economic conditions.

Recently, a new pension plan called notional defined-contribution (NDC) plans is established. This plan combines PAYG scheme with funded defined contribution plan. In this plan, current workers are financing pensions of current retirees, but their contributions are also credited to notional accounts, even though they are not accumulated in real accounts. When these workers are retired, their pension benefits will be determined by their accumulated notional capital [(4)](http://www.economist.com/blogs/freeexchange/2013/01/reforming-public-pensions). These notional accounts are maintained for participants and these accounts earn a rate of return which is determined by pension plans each year and payments to this account behave like contributions to funded system [(5)](http://www.nber.org/chapters/c4533.pdf). 

###Three Pillars of Pension System
The World Bank advises governments to design pension schemes which are divided into three pillars: [(6)](http://www.un.org/esa/desa/papers/2000/esa00dp13.pdf)
<ul>
<li>First Pillar: These pensions are financed by taxation on a pay-as-you-go basis that aims to reduce poverty in old age.</li>
<li>Second Pillar: This system consists of mandatory contributions for pensions and provides benefits only to contributors.</li>
<li>Third Pillar: This system is similar to second pillar but participation for this pillar is voluntary so this includes typically private pension plan.</li>
</ul>
##Demographic Changes
###The Baby Boom
Many countries worldwide are currently experiencing an ageing population. This is due to factors such as a decline in fertility, the baby boom, longevity, and migration. Two years after the second world war, the birth rate spiked for many countries. The birth rate remained above average for twenty more years to come. This event is referred to as the baby boom. In turn, it implicates the rising concerns of ageing population since this “peak” of fertility is now reaching retirement age.

###Fertility Rate
Despite popular believes that the baby boomers are the main cause of an ageing population, this is not entirely true. The sharp drop in fertility rates from the 1970’s onwards is also a large contributor to the demographic changes. The main reason for this drop is the introduction of the contraceptive pill and the emancipation of women. In the Netherlands for instance the fertility rate in 1960 was 3.12 children per woman, while in 1975 it had already decreased to 1.66 - a very large difference. We see the same decrease in the USA (though less strong), China (even before the One-Child Policy was implemented) and many other countries. Countries with a high living standard have an especially low fertility rate. [(7)](http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.DYN.TFRT.IN?)

In developed countries, the replacement fertility rate is roughly two meaning that a woman needs to have, on average, two children in order to keep a stable population. In other words, when the fertility rate is below two, the population decreases. In developing countries, the replacement rate is often higher, between 2.5 and 3.3, due to higher mortality rates. Currently the fertility rate in the Netherlands is 1.72 and therefore below the replacement rate. This is an event that is happening in most developed countries, which is also contributing to the ageing of the population.

###Longevity
Another force that contributes to the ageing population in many nations is the increased life expectancy or longevity. Because of better living conditions and healthcare, the life expectancy for most western nations started to increase from the mid-Nineteenth Century onwards. During this time period, it doubled to the point where children born today are expected to survive more than eighty years. [(8)](http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.DYN.LE00.IN)

Despite this sizeable increase in life expectancy the age of retirement from the end of the Second World War until recently has barely changed in most Western countries. In some cases, the retirement age even decreased in order to make room for younger workers. As a result, the years of retirement have increased by six years for the OECD countries. The decreasing fertility rate, increasing life expectancy and sluggish decision making with regards to eligibility for pension benefits combined, are increasing the amount of money needed to sustain the current pension systems. With the current population growth, the ratio of workers per retiree will decrease to less than two in 2060 [(9)](http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/publications/european_economy/2012/pdf/ee-2012-2_en.pdf) for the European Union countries. Imagine that each family with two working parents not only have to take care of their children but also one retiree.

But how exactly do these problems manifest themselves? The impact of an ageing population on pensions is following.

##Government Debt And Pensions
As mentioned, pension systems are subject to risks, ranging from macroeconomic shocks (such as a financial crisis) to political and longevity risks.

Funded systems are typically subject to risks due to poor financial market performance, as it is the case during a financial crisis. This is because poor performance leads to poor return on savings during the working years. In addition, funded pension systems face the risk of poor performance due to mismanagement of funds. To counter these risks, various tools are being used, most of which provided by insurance companies. 

On the other hand, because typical PAYG systems are funded from a government’s current tax revenue sources, they are not (as badly) affected by financial crisis. However, if the number of retired persons increases at a faster pace than the number of working persons, the tax on the currently working population has to be increased in order to meet current pension obligations. In addition, if the number of retirees per working individual keeps increasing, as has been the case in many countries, the PAYG system becomes unsustainable in the long run, leading to a pension crisis. 

In addition, Governments making use of the PAYG system sometimes use debt to fund its pensions, when income from tax revenues doesn’t match its pension obligations. In 2016, the Wall Street Journal (WSJ) identifies 20 OECD countries with a debt of $78 trillion towards pensions [(10)](http://blogs.wsj.com/moneybeat/2016/03/17/global-government-debt-is-actually-triple-what-we-thought-thanks-to-pensions/). This is $4,5 trillion more than the world’s GDP in 2015 [(11)](http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD). This practice, combined with an unsustainable PAYG system, lends governments unable to pay out the pension benefits promised, as has been the case in Greece and Poland recently [(12)](http://www.wsj.com/articles/europe-faces-pension-predicament-1457287588).

Even if PAYG systems were to be sustainable, there is still the problem of wealth redistribution. More specifically, because of increased longevity, people live longer and hence have more time to consume, without contribution. To better understand, think of the total income or output generated by a country’s working population, of which a certain proportion has to go to the old generation (non-working) in order to ensure their pensions. If the old generation lives longer, it gets to consume more without participating towards the economy, with the young having to contribute more towards pension sustenance. 

##Sustainable PAYG
Due to the increased burden on workers caused by the ageing population, politicians may favour changing the PAYG system to a funded system. However, transforming the current PAYG to funded system has many obstacles and the results are uncertain, in particular, when PAYG is well established and the economy is too big to easily make such a structural reform. It is therefore not surprising that many economists favor partial reforms rather than dismantling the whole PAYG scheme [(13)](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1468-246X.00122/abstract). The most common proposals how to make the pension system sustainable are the following:

###1) Higher contribution rate or lower benefits
Obviously, this is the basic straightforward way of how to solve any pressures in government budget. Nevertheless, any increase in compulsory payments is highly unpopular and therefore hardly obtains political support. After all, workers do not favor paying more for the elderly generation than they will ever receive themselves. From their point of view, private savings may seem to be much more profitable [(14)](http://www.nber.org/papers/w6149). The same applies to lowering the retirement benefits. For these reasons, politicians are usually looking for other solutions.

###2) Increase in retirement age
A way of solving the government deficit is by increasing the retirement age. This way, people pay taxes for additional years and receive benefits for fewer years. Neither this solution is popular in society. Its main advantage is, however, that it may be accepted for its fairness. Considering the substantial increase in longevity during the past decades, holding the same age of retirement would mean more years of receiving pension benefits while the number of working years would be the same. Policies increasing the retirement age are adopted worldwide; either by one-shot decisions or as a long-term policy gradually increasing the limit according to changes in life expectancy [(15)](http://www.economist.com/node/2085219).

An infamous example of this solution is Greece. According to OECD (2008) [(16)](http://www.oecd.org/pensions/private-pensions/42169565.pdf), the replacement rate from public (unfunded) pension system was nearly 100%. The statutory retirement age was 65 for men and 60 for women. Because of the economic crisis and excessive debt, reforms increasing the retirement age to 67 for both sexes were inevitable [(17)](http://www.economist.com/blogs/freeexchange/2015/06/greek-pensions).

###3) Notional Defined Contribution (NDC)
As already mentioned in the first section, this pension scheme takes over many advantages of funded pensions without obstacles and painful decisions related to full transformation. Since the size of benefits paid is flexible and dependent on the amount paid during lifetime, life expectancy and expected notional interest rate, such a system seems to be relatively fair and stable [(18)]( http://dare.uva.nl/cgi/arno/show.cgi?fid=133250).

This reform has already been introduced in many developed countries. As the “First Wave of NDC Reforms” is called the implementation of NDC in Italy, Latvia, Poland, and Sweden during the 90’s. According to The World Bank (2012) study [(19)](https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/9378), introducing the new system went relatively smoothly in all the countries, even though the full implementation of NDC took a lot of time in Italy. In all four countries, NDC provides a gross replacement rate of about 65% of the worker’s labour income. However, an individual risk arises from early retirement, time spent by child care or by care of family members, hence causing a relative poverty of some cohorts. For this reason, Sweden provides a support to women ensuring childbirth will not have an effect on their pensions.

###4) Increase the productivity of workers
This is indeed a desirable solution. Workers producing more are also paying more to the pensions’ budget without increasing the contribution rate. Unfortunately, increasing the productivity by various government policies has always been desirable for plenty of reasons, yet mostly with dubious results. It is also a costly long-term project, so there will be no immediate results for the pension system problems.

###5) Increase the number of workers
There are various ways how to reach this goal: from labor market policies lowering unemployment up to increasing retirement age as more former retirees are still working. Another way is to relax immigration rules leading to inflow of foreign workers. Immigration of work force increases the working population in a country and so it will be more likely that the jobs of the retirees are filled. Nevertheless, the results are dependent on many factors. At the beginning of the refugee crisis in 2015, many analysts and entrepreneurs expected inflow of labor force to the ageing Europe. Unfortunately, this expectation now seems to be overly optimistic since many immigrants struggle with lack of education and skills necessary for European labour market as well as language barrier, as realized the largest companies in Germany [(20)](https://www.ft.com/content/d5d0bb96-49a8-11e6-8d68-72e9211e86ab).

###6) Higher fertility
Some would say the only sustainable solution is to increase the fertility above the replacement rate (i.e. more than 2 children per woman). The government has many tools how to support families by lowering the children expenditures, such as family allowances, parental leaves or free education for children. Actually, most of the developed countries provide some sort of stimulation for higher fertility, yet the rate in most of them is somewhere between 1.4 and 1.9 [(21)](http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.DYN.TFRT.IN?end=2014&start=2014&view=map&year=2014&year_high_desc=true).

One of the possible reasons for that, could be too generous pension systems, as noted in Introduction. Galasso, Gatti, & Profeta (2009) provide both mathematical and empirical proofs that generous public pensions lead to lower fertility as the economic role of family is undermined [(22)](http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10797-009-9104-5). Hence, according to their results, reducing the pension benefits as proposed under the first point could have both direct and indirect effect on sustainability of the PAYG pension system. 

##Sustainable Funded System [(23)](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/reforming-pensions-9780195311303?cc=nl&lang=en&)
Even though nowadays there are rising arguments for the funded system, there are in fact sustainability issues linked with the funded system as well. In the unfortunate occurrence of an extreme financial events such as recessions, market inefficiencies, low interest rate returns, etc., fully funded systems can be sensitive and prone to failures. Here are some likely scenarios that may cause the unsustainability of the system:

###1)	Risks under financial crisis or market inefficiencies
In the face of a financial downturn, the funded system may run into issues such that the benefits may not make ends meet for pensioners even though they have contributed. This could potentially lead to political unrest. Furthermore, higher savings due to ageing may lead to low interest rates due to a high supply of money, and this could be a vicious cycle that could potentially usher the downfall of a funded system.

###2)	Ageing related drawbacks
Due to the rising concerns of an ageing population, the life expectancy is generally rising higher. The height of pension benefits depends on a pensioners’ expected remaining life years at their retirement age. The younger one retires, the lower the accumulated contributions are. Hence, the lower the conversion of these contributions into a monthly pension benefit will be. Therefore, the funded system may not be sustainable if pensioners live beyond their expected life expectancy.

###3)	High transition cost
There could potentially be high costs in transitioning into a funded system. There could be “losing generations” who, at the beginning of their working life, were contributors without promised compensations. This may lead to low trust in the government or the corresponding institutions.

###4)	Lack of sophisticated institutions & potential political risks
A funded system may not be feasible if a country lacks the appropriate institutions to operate such a system. There could be a lack of administration or pension funds allocation skills, as well as lacking the capacity to regulate the financial markets. 

##Application
###Demographic transition of the Netherlands
In 2016, the Netherlands had around 17,000,000 inhabitants and around 16% of the population was elderly, meaning they are over 65 years [(24)](https://www.cbs.nl/en-gb). Just after the Second World War the population almost doubled from 5.1 million to 10 million people due to baby boom effect. However, after that time, birth rates strongly decreased while life expectancy went up. How these numbers have changed over time is shown in the graphs below.

[Graph 1](http://data.worldbank.org/share/widget?indicators=SP.DYN.TFRT.IN&locations=NL)

[Graph 2](http://data.worldbank.org/share/widget?indicators=SP.DYN.LE00.IN&locations=NL)

As can be seen, the Netherlands faced similar demographic changes as most OECD and EU countries as was explained earlier. With less people born while the life expectancy is increasing the population is ageing which implies an increasing dependency ratio in the Netherlands. 

###Pension system in the Netherlands
As mentioned, many countries face the same challenges when it comes to providing a sustainable pension benefit. The main determinants of a well-designed pension system are adequacy, sustainability and integrity. 
Adequacy can be explained by how adequate pension benefits are, which is the main concern of most participants in a pension system. Sustainability boils down to how strongly participants rely on private pension systems, the level of government debt, the funding level, the development of the expected length of retirement and the labour force participation. Integrity concerns the regulation and governance, costs of the system and transparency towards participants.
 
Because of its design the Dutch pension system scores well compared to other countries [(25)](http://www.globalpensionindex.com/);[(26)](http://www.globalpensionindex.com/wp-content/uploads/MMGPI2016-Report.pdf). This however does not imply it is time to relax, since one of the biggest perks of the Dutch system is its mandatory, and therefore large, participation which is under pressure because of changes in the labour market [(27)](https://pure.uvt.nl/portal/en/publications/dealing-with-the-new-giants(652bbc2e-c1dd-4ea9-a931-573717304e59).html).

The first pillar is a PAYG system and the second pillar generally follows a Notional DC scheme [(28)](http://www.actuaries.org/CTTEES_SOCSEC/Documents/27_Cichon.pdf). The majority of pension money is managed by pension funds (second pillar). Over 90% of Dutch have a pension scheme through their employers. There are around 80 industry pension funds and they control around 70% of total assets of Dutch pension funds of around 480 billion euro [(29)](https://pure.uvt.nl/portal/files/924069/KortlevePonds_Ch10_BundleFairValuePFmanagement.pdf).

Since the Dutch population, as in many other countries, is aging, the government needs to implement changes to make the system sustainable. Already, the retirement age has been increased from 65 years to 66 years in 2018 and 67 years in 2021. From 2022, the retirement age will be fully connected with life expectancy.

The debate that has yet to be settled, is whether pension systems should be reformed more towards individual plans or reform the collective plans. With the first option participants have more options for customization in both the accumulation as the decumulation phase. The second option ensures the possibility of intergenerational risk sharing with current and future cohorts. There is no right or wrong answer in this case, the outcome relies on the preference of policymakers and the people they represent. 
